---
title: "RTCP Messages for Point Cloud Prioritization"
category: std

docname: draft-engelbart-avtcore-rtcp-point-cloud-roi-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Web and Internet Transport"
workgroup: "Audio/Video Transport Core Maintenance"
keyword:
 - RTP
 - RTCP
 - ROI
 - Point Cloud
venue:
  group: "Audio/Video Transport Core Maintenance"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "avt@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/avt/"
  github: "mengelbart/draft-engelbart-avtcore-rtcp-point-cloud-roi"
  latest: "https://mengelbart.github.io/draft-engelbart-avtcore-rtcp-point-cloud-roi/draft-engelbart-avtcore-rtcp-point-cloud-roi.html"

author:
 -
    ins: M. Engelbart
    fullname: Mathis Engelbart
    organization: Technical University Munich
    email: mathis.engelbart@tum.de
 -
    ins: J. Ott
    fullname: Jörg Ott
    organization: Technical University Munich
    email: ott@in.tum.de
 -
    ins: L. Kondrad
    fullname: Lukasz Kondrad
    organization: Nokia Technologies
    email: lukasz.kondrad@nokia.com


#normative:

--- abstract

This document specifies RTCP messages and RTP header extensions for exchanging
parameters of real-time streamed point clouds. A sender can notify receivers of
the currently applied parameters, such as selected regions, and their
parameters, such as the respective resolutions and included point attributes. A
receiver can request updates to the same parameters using RTCP feedback
messages.

--- middle

# Introduction

A point cloud is a set of data points in a three-dimensional coordinate system
where each point is defined by its three coordinates. Point clouds can represent
three-dimensional environments, such as a vehicle's surroundings. Each point in
a point cloud may optionally be associated with additional attributes.
Attributes can, for example, be colors or reflectance of objects in the scene.
Sequences of point clouds can be generated by sensors such as Lidar ("light
detection and ranging"), Radar ("radio detection and ranging"), or a
multi-camera setup. Due to the high number of points in a scene, the bandwidth
requirements of transmitting point clouds over a network are often higher than
those of streaming video. In video streaming, efficient codecs are used to
reduce the bandwidth requirement. Similar codecs are being developed for point
clouds. However, when streaming point cloud data, consumers of the data usually
aren't equally interested in each point. For further processing, focusing on
some regions of a point cloud stream is often sufficient, allowing the producer
of a point cloud sequence to filter out points of lower interest to further
reduce the bandwidth requirements and prioritize bandwidth usage for points of
higher importance. When selecting the regions to prioritize and deciding which
points can be excluded from transmission, producers and consumers need a
mechanism to signal a) which regions of a scene are currently being prioritized
and b) request updates to prioritize different regions in the future. This
document describes such a mechanism for real-time transmission of point clouds
building on the RTP Control protocol RTCP, which is part of the Real-time
Transport Protocol RTP. Additionally, this document provides RTP header
extensions for senders to inform receivers about the currently applied
parameters. The information might be useful for receivers in determining if an
RTCP message requesting an update was received and acted upon by the sender.

In {{encoding}}, this document first defines a set of shared encoding schemes to
represent point cloud parameters. {{rtcp-feedback-messages-format}} and
{{rtp-header-extensions-format}} define RTCP messages and RTP header extensions,
respectively. The RTCP messages and RTP header extensions reference the encoding
scheme in {{encoding}}. {{sdp-parameters}} defines the SDP parameters required
to negotiate the usage of the presented RTCP messages and header extensions.

# Conventions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Definitions and Abbreviations

> **TODO**: Add definitions or remove section

# Region and Parameter Encodings {#encoding}

This section introduces encodings for point cloud regions and their parameters,
such as the included attributes and the level of detail. It also provides an
encoding for the definition of a viewport, including a dynamically adaptable
precision.

The encodings described in the following subsections are reused in RTCP feedback
messages and RTP header extension as described in
{{rtcp-feedback-messages-format}} and {{rtp-header-extensions-format}}.

## Octree Encoding of Point Cloud Regions {#octree-encoding}

This section defines an encoding that is reused in RTCP message types to index
regions in a point cloud. The encoding uses a recursive octree encoding to
signal the presence of certain regions of a point cloud. The encoding can be
used to set parameters for the present regions, e.g., receivers can signal
individual priority of every region or sets of attributes to include in every
region.

The root node in every tree is a single byte where every bit indicates whether a
child node of an octant is present. Child nodes are appended in pre-order
traversal order. A zero-byte encodes a leaf node. The order of octants by the
signs of the points of the X-, Y-, and Z-coordinates in each octant is given in
{{table-octree-signs}}.

Regions in the octree are considered present when a leaf node encoding that
region is present. For example, a single zero-byte encodes a single leaf node,
and the root region covering the complete space is present. An encoded value of
the two bytes `0x4000` would indicate that only the octant with X<0, Y>=0, and
Z>=0 is present.

| Bit | X | Y | Z |
| --- | - | - | - |
|  0  | + | + | + |
|  1  | - | + | + |
|  2  | - | - | + |
|  3  | + | - | + |
|  4  | + | + | - |
|  5  | - | + | - |
|  6  | - | - | - |
|  7  | + | - | - |
{: #table-octree-signs title="Octant to bit mapping order with bit 0 being the most significant bit and bit 7 being the least significant bit."}

The octree encoding can be used in absolute and relative forms. In the absolute
form, the bounding box of the octree is implicitly defined by the space covered
by the point cloud-generating source. In the relative form, the bounding box can
be explicitly defined by setting the min and max values of the X-, Y-, and
Z-coordinates. The coordinates are prefixed before the octree encoding as
four-byte integers each, as shown in {{fig-rel-octree-encoding}}.

~~~
    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Min X                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Min Y                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Min Z                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Max X                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Max Y                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Max Z                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | octree encoding                                             ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~
{: #fig-rel-octree-encoding title="Relative octree encoding using an explicitly defined bounding box"}

## Region-Dependent Attributes Encoding {#attribute-encoding}

Attributes are additional values optionally associated with every point in a
point cloud. The available attributes depend on the context of an application
and thus need to be configured out-of-band. The attribute encoding described in
this section requires mapping attributes to a bitmask value. {{sdp-parameters}}
describes one option to negotiate the mapping when using SDP.

To signal the presence of attributes per region, senders and receivers can use
the octree encoding presented in {{octree-encoding}}. For every region presented
in the octree encoding, N bytes will be used to indicate the presence of
attributes by setting the bits of the bitmask of the respective attributes to
true. The size of N depends on the number of attributes and is implicitly given
by the smallest number of bytes that can represent the largest bitmask
negotiated during signaling.

Bitmask values can be shared among attributes to allow signaling of attribute
sets that always occur in combination.

# Format of RTCP Feedback Messages {#rtcp-feedback-messages-format}

This document describes RTCP message types that can be used to signal interest
in the prioritization of regions and their parameters. Receivers can signal an
interest in receiving a region with a higher priority. Different regions can be
requested in different resolutions or with different sets of attributes
included. Additionally, receivers can request a viewport precision update.

A sender can acknowledge a parameter update using the RTP header extensions
described in {{rtp-header-extensions-format}}. Receivers should not retransmit
the same request multiple times to avoid unnecessary overhead, but if the
receiver can assume that a request was lost, it may retransmit the request. The
request should not be retransmitted earlier than at least one RTT after the
first request was transmitted.

The following sections define the available message types in detail. All RTCP
feedback messages use the common header format shown in {{fig-header}}. The
first eight bytes of the header follow the format of RTCP message headers
defined in {{!RFC3550}}. The common header is followed by an additional byte
consisting of flags describing the payload.

The payload of the RTCP messages following the header contains one or more of
the parameter encodings in the following order:

1. Absolute/Relative Octree Encoding
2. (optional) Priority
3. (optional) Attribute Encoding
4. (optional) Level-of-Detail Encoding

> **Note**: alternative form:
> `<Header><{abs,rel}-octree>[<priority>][<attributes>][<level-of-detail>]`

> **TODO**: In addition to the encodings already described here, one could come
> up with additional parameter requests such as viewport precision, and sender
> position and possibly others.

The semantics of the different payload formats are explained in the following
subsections.

~~~
    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |V=2|P|   FMT   |       PT      |          length               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                  SSRC of packet sender                        |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |  Res. |R|P|A|L| Payload                                      ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~
{: #fig-header title="Common RTCP feedback message header"}

The fields V, P, SSRC and length are used as defined in the RTP specification {{!RFC3550}}. The respective meaning is summarized below:

version (V): 2 bits
  : This field identifies the RTP version. The current version is 2.

padding (P): 1 bit
  : If set, the padding bit indicates that the packet contains additional padding octets at the end that are not part of the control information but are included in the length field.

Feedback message type (FMT): 5 bits
  : The feedback message type is XX (**TODO**: Use correct value).

Payload type (PT): 8 bits
  : The RTCP packet type is PSFB (206).

Relative (R): 1 bit
  : This field distinguishes between absolute and relative region requests (see
  {{octree-encoding}}. If the bit is set, the message contains a relative octree
  encoding and the minimum and maximum fields described in
  {{fig-rel-octree-encoding}} are present.

Priority: (P): 1 bit
  : If set, the RTCP message contains a priority request and the octree encoding is followed by one byte indicating the requested priority for each region encoded as leaf node in the octree encoding.

Attributes (A): 1 bit
  : If this bit is set, the RTCP message contains an attribute request and the octree encoding is followed by an attribute encoding for every region encoded as leaf node in the octree encdoing.

Level-of-Detail (L): 1 bit
  : If this bit is set, the RTCP message contains a level-of-detail request and the octree encoding (or the attribute encoding, if it is present) is followed by a level-of-detail encoding for every region encoded as leaf node in the octree encoding.

## Region Requests

A receiver can use region of Interest signaling to indicate interest in some
areas of a point cloud, and a sender can react by prioritizing the regions of
interest when allocating bandwidth.

The region interest request uses the standard header defined in {{fig-header}}.

## Priority Requests

Receivers can append a priority encoding to the octree to signal fine-grained
priorities per region. A priority is a value encoded as a single byte where a
higher value indicates a higher priority. A priority request contains a priority
byte for every region encoded as a leaf node in the preceding octree encoding.

## Attribute Requests

By setting the header Flag A to 1, the receiver can include an attribute
encoding as described in {{attribute-encoding}} to the feedback message to
request attribute sets for every region encoded as a leaf node of the octree.
The attribute encoding length depends on the number of negotiated attributes and
their associated bitmask values. A single byte can indicate up to eight
attributes or attribute sets. For example, if the two attributes, color, and
reflectance, are negotiated with bitmask values of 0x01 and 0x02, one byte will
be appended to the octree for every leaf node where the bits 0x01 and 0x02 are
set to one for every region, which should include these attributes.

## TODO: Region-Dependen Resolution or Level-of-Detail Request

> **TODO**: Using the same mechanism as for attrbiutes, we can signal resolution
> per region, but we need to define how to express *resolution*.

## Examples

An example encoding of a relative octree encoding followed by attribute and level-of-detail encodings:

~~~
    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |V=2|P|   FMT   |       PT      |          length               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                  SSRC of packet sender                        |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |  Res. |1|0|1|1| Payload                                      ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Min X                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Min Y                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Min Z                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Max X                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Max Y                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            Max Z                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | octree encoding                                             ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | attribute encoding                                          ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | level-of-detail encdoing                                    ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~
{: #fig-region-attributes-lod-request title="A RTCP feedback message containing a relative octree encoding, attribute encoding and level-of-detail encoding."}

# Format of RTP Header Extensions {#rtp-header-extensions-format}

RTP senders use RTP header extensions to acknowledge the applied parameters to
the receiver. The parameters chosen by the sender may differ from the ones
requested by the receiver. The header extension uses the two-byte header form
defined in {{!RFC8285}}. The payload of the header extension element uses the
same format as the RTCP messages defined in {{rtcp-feedback-messages-format}}.
Each extension element begins with the same one-byte header
({{fig-payload-header}}) followed by an octree encoding and optional priority,
attribute, or level-of-detail encodings.

~~~
    0
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |  Res. |R|P|A|L|
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~
{: #fig-payload-header title="Common RTP header extension payload header"}

# SDP Parameters {#sdp-parameters}

This section defines SDP parameters for negotiating usage of the RTCP messages
and RTP header extension described in this document.

## RTCP Feedback Messages

The rtcp-fb attribute is extended to indicate the capability to send or receive
the RTCP feedback defined in this document. This document adds a new parameter
"oerr" to the "ccm" feedback value defined in {{!RFC5104}}. The "oerr" (Octree
Encoded Region Request) parameter indicates support for the RTCP feedback
message defined in {{rtcp-feedback-messages-format}}.

rtcp-fb-ccm-param =/ SP "oerr" ; Octree Encoded Region Request

## RTP Header Extensions

The URI for indicating support for the RTP Header extension described in
{{rtp-header-extensions-format}} is "urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:octree-region".

# IANA Considerations

## RTCP Feedback Message

The following value are requested to be registered as FMT value in the "FMT
Values for PSFB Payload Types" Registry:

Name:
  : OERR

Long Name:
  : Octree Encoded Region Request

Value:
  : **TODO**

Reference:
  : **TODO:** This document

## RTP Header Extension

The following URI is requested to be added to the RTP Compact Header Extensions
registry:

Extension URI:
  : urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:octree-region

Description:
  : Octree Encoded Region Information

Contact:
  : mathis.engelbart@gmail.com

Reference:
  : **TODO**: This document

# Security Considerations {#security-considerations}

TODO

# RFC Editor Considerations

Note to RFC Editor: This section may be removed after carrying out all the
instructions of this section.

TODO: Consider

--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.


